DOCKER_VS_KUBERNETES.md, before:

# Docker vs Kubernetes: Which Should You Use?

A clear comparison to help you choose the right deployment approach for your needs.

---

## 🎯 **Quick Decision Tree**

```
Are you deploying to production with high availability requirements?
├─ NO  → Use Docker Compose (see below)
└─ YES → Do you have 10+ CPUs and 16GB+ RAM?
         ├─ NO  → Use Hybrid Deployment
         └─ YES → Use Full Kubernetes
```

---

## 🐳 **Docker Compose: Simple & Fast**

### **When to Use Docker Compose**

- ✅ Development and testing
- ✅ Demo environments
- ✅ Single-server deployments
- ✅ Learning MongoDB features
- ✅ Budget constraints (4 CPU machines work!)
- ✅ Quick iterations and debugging

### **Pros of Docker Compose**

| Aspect | Docker Compose |
|--------|----------------|
| **Setup Time** | 5-10 minutes |
| **Commands** | `docker compose up -d` (that's it!) |
| **Resource Requirements** | 4 CPUs, 8GB RAM, 20GB disk |
| **Learning Curve** | ⭐ Easy - just YAML |
| **Debugging** | ⭐⭐⭐ Very easy - `docker logs` |
| **Updates** | ⭐⭐⭐ Simple - edit YAML, restart |
| **Cost** | $ Cheap cloud VMs work fine |
| **Networking** | Simple - localhost everywhere |
| **State Management** | Docker volumes (simple) |

### **Cons of Docker Compose**

- ❌ No high availability (single server)
- ❌ No auto-failover
- ❌ Manual scaling required
- ❌ No native `$vectorSearch` (unless using hybrid)
- ❌ Not production-grade for critical apps

### **Example Docker Compose Workflow**

```bash
# Start everything
docker compose up -d

# Check logs
docker compose logs -f

# Update configuration
nano docker-compose.yml

# Restart
docker compose restart

# Stop
docker compose down

# Total complexity: LOW
```

---

## ☸️ **Kubernetes: Enterprise & Production**

### **When to Use Kubernetes**

- ✅ Production deployments
- ✅ High availability requirements
- ✅ Auto-scaling needs
- ✅ Multi-server deployments
- ✅ Enterprise compliance
- ✅ Complex microservices

### **Pros of Kubernetes**

| Aspect | Kubernetes |
|--------|------------|
| **High Availability** | ✅ 3+ node replica sets |
| **Auto-Failover** | ✅ Automatic pod rescheduling |
| **Scaling** | ✅ Horizontal pod autoscaling |
| **Monitoring** | ✅ Ops Manager included |
| **Enterprise Features** | ✅ All MongoDB Enterprise features |
| **Native Vector Search** | ✅ Dedicated mongot pods |
| **Production Ready** | ✅ Battle-tested at scale |

### **Cons of Kubernetes**

| Aspect | Challenge |
|--------|-----------|
| **Setup Time** | ⏱️ 30-60 minutes |
| **Commands** | 🤯 kubectl, helm, yaml manifests |
| **Resource Requirements** | 💰 10+ CPUs, 16GB+ RAM, 50GB disk |
| **Learning Curve** | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ Steep - pods, services, CRDs |
| **Debugging** | 🔍 Complex - multiple layers |
| **Updates** | 📦 Operator-managed, can be complex |
| **Cost** | $$$ Expensive infrastructure |
| **Networking** | 🌐 Complex - services, ingress, DNS |
| **State Management** | 💾 PVCs, StatefulSets, operators |

### **Example Kubernetes Workflow**

```bash
# Create cluster
./setup-kubernetes-cluster.sh

# Deploy operator
helm install mongodb-kubernetes mongodb/mongodb-kubernetes

# Create MongoDB resource
kubectl apply -f mongodb.yaml

# Check status
kubectl get pods -n mongodb
kubectl get mdb -n mongodb
kubectl logs deployment/mongodb-kubernetes-operator

# Debug issues
kubectl describe pod mongodb-0 -n mongodb
kubectl get events -n mongodb
kubectl logs -n mongodb mongodb-0 -c mongodb-enterprise-database

# Update configuration
kubectl edit mdb mdb-rs -n mongodb

# Total complexity: HIGH
```

---

## 🔄 **Hybrid: Best of Both Worlds**

### **The Hybrid Approach**

- **Docker Compose** (4 CPUs): MongoDB, Backend, Frontend, Ollama
- **Kubernetes** (2-3 CPUs): Only mongot search pods

### **Why Hybrid is Great**

| Benefit | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Lower Resources** | 6-7 CPUs instead of 10+ |
| **Easier Debugging** | App in Docker (simple), search in K8s |
| **Native Vector Search** | Get `$vectorSearch` without full K8s |
| **Cost Effective** | Cheaper than full K8s |
| **Good Balance** | Production features, dev simplicity |

### **Hybrid Deployment**

```bash
# 1. Start Docker Compose (app)
docker compose up -d

# 2. Deploy search to Kubernetes
export SEARCH_SYNC_PASSWORD="password123"
./deploy-search-only.sh

# 3. Connect them
cat > docker-compose.override.yml << EOF
services:
  mongodb:
    environment:
      MONGOT_HOST: "LOADBALANCER_IP:27027"
EOF

docker compose restart mongodb

# Done! Native vector search with Docker simplicity
```

---

## 📊 **Feature Comparison**

| Feature | Docker Compose | Hybrid | Full Kubernetes |
|---------|----------------|--------|-----------------|
| **Setup Complexity** | ⭐ Easy | ⭐⭐ Medium | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ Hard |
| **Resource Needs** | 4 CPU, 8GB | 6-7 CPU, 10GB | 10+ CPU, 16GB+ |
| **High Availability** | ❌ No | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **Native $vectorSearch** | ❌ No | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes |
| **Auto-Failover** | ❌ No | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **Ops Manager** | ❌ No | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **Debugging Ease** | ⭐⭐⭐ | ⭐⭐ | ⭐ |
| **Update Speed** | ⭐⭐⭐ | ⭐⭐ | ⭐ |
| **Cost** | $ | $$ | $$$ |
| **Production Ready** | ⚠️ Dev only | ⚠️ Small prod | ✅ Enterprise |

---

## 💡 **Why Docker is Easier Than Kubernetes**

### **1. Simplicity**

**Docker Compose:**
```yaml
services:
  mongodb:
    image: mongodb/mongodb-enterprise-server:8.2.1
    ports:
      - "27017:27017"
```

**Kubernetes:**
```yaml
apiVersion: mongodb.com/v1
kind: MongoDB
metadata:
  name: mdb-rs
spec:
  members: 3
  version: 8.2.1-ent
  type: ReplicaSet
  credentials: om-credentials
  opsManager:
    configMapRef:
      name: om-project
  # ... 50 more lines ...
```

### **2. Debugging**

**Docker Compose:**
```bash
docker compose logs mongodb
# Done! See the logs.
```

**Kubernetes:**
```bash
kubectl logs deployment/mongodb-kubernetes-operator -n mongodb
kubectl logs mdb-rs-0 -n mongodb -c mongodb-enterprise-database
kubectl logs mdb-rs-0 -n mongodb -c mongodb-agent
kubectl describe pod mdb-rs-0 -n mongodb
kubectl get events -n mongodb
# Which one has the error? 🤔
```

### **3. Networking**

**Docker Compose:**
- Everything connects via `service-name:port`
- `mongodb:27017` - that's it!

**Kubernetes:**
- Services, ClusterIP, LoadBalancer, NodePort
- DNS: `mdb-rs-svc.mongodb.svc.cluster.local:27017`
- External access needs ingress or port-forward
- Network policies, CNI plugins...

### **4. State Management**

**Docker Compose:**
```yaml
volumes:
  mongodb_data:
```

**Kubernetes:**
```yaml
# PersistentVolumeClaim
# StorageClass
# Dynamic provisioning
# StatefulSet volumeClaimTemplates
# Storage drivers
# ... many concepts ...
```

### **5. Updates**

**Docker Compose:**
```bash
# Edit docker-compose.yml
nano docker-compose.yml

# Restart
docker compose restart
```

**Kubernetes:**
```bash
# Update through operator
kubectl edit mdb mdb-rs -n mongodb

# Wait for operator to reconcile
kubectl get mdb -w

# Check if it worked
kubectl describe mdb mdb-rs

# Roll back if needed
kubectl rollout undo statefulset/mdb-rs
```

---

## 🎯 **Recommendations by Use Case**

### **Development / Learning**
→ **Docker Compose**
- Fastest setup
- Easy to experiment
- Simple debugging

### **Demo / POC**
→ **Docker Compose** or **Hybrid**
- Docker Compose for simple demos
- Hybrid if you need to show vector search

### **Small Production (< 1000 users)**
→ **Hybrid**
- Get production features
- Lower cost than full K8s
- Easier to manage

### **Enterprise Production**
→ **Full Kubernetes**
- High availability required
- Auto-failover needed
- Budget for infrastructure

### **Budget Constrained**
→ **Docker Compose**
- Runs on cheap $20/month VMs
- 4 CPU machines work fine

---

## 📖 **Getting Started**

### **Quick Start with Docker Compose**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/darmad78/RAGOnPremMongoDB.git
cd RAGOnPremMongoDB
docker compose up -d
# Visit http://localhost:5173
```

### **Quick Start with Hybrid**
```bash
# 1. Docker app
docker compose up -d

# 2. K8s search
export SEARCH_SYNC_PASSWORD="password123"
./deploy-search-only.sh

# 3. Connect
# Follow instructions from deploy-search-only.sh
```

### **Quick Start with Kubernetes**
```bash
./setup-kubernetes-cluster.sh
./deploy.sh
```

---

## ❓ **FAQ**

**Q: Can I start with Docker and migrate to Kubernetes later?**
A: Yes! Use `mongodump` to backup, deploy K8s, then `mongorestore`.

**Q: Why can't Docker Compose do high availability?**
A: Docker Compose runs on a single host. If that host dies, everything stops.

**Q: Is hybrid deployment production-ready?**
A: For small-medium workloads, yes. For mission-critical with 24/7 uptime needs, use full Kubernetes.

**Q: How much does each option cost per month?**
A: 
- Docker Compose: $20-50 (single VM)
- Hybrid: $50-100 (VM + small K8s)
- Full Kubernetes: $200-500+ (managed K8s cluster)

**Q: Which gives me native $vectorSearch?**
A: Hybrid and Full Kubernetes. Docker Compose uses Python fallback (which still works well!).

---

## 🎓 **Learning Path**

1. **Start**: Docker Compose (1 hour to learn)
2. **Add**: Hybrid deployment (understand K8s basics)
3. **Advance**: Full Kubernetes (weeks to master)

Don't jump straight to Kubernetes unless you need it!

---

**Questions?** Check the main [README.md](./README.md) for detailed guides!

Commit message:

Organize repository: archive unused scripts and configs, add cleanup handlers and improve documentation

DOCKER_VS_KUBERNETES.md, after:

# Docker vs Kubernetes: Which Should You Use?

A clear comparison to help you choose the right deployment approach for your needs.

---

## 🎯 **Quick Decision Tree**

```
Are you deploying to production with high availability requirements?
├─ NO  → Use Docker Compose (see below)
└─ YES → Do you have 10+ CPUs and 16GB+ RAM?
         ├─ NO  → Use Hybrid Deployment
         └─ YES → Use Full Kubernetes
```

---

## 🐳 **Docker Compose: Simple & Fast**

### **When to Use Docker Compose**

- ✅ Development and testing
- ✅ Demo environments
- ✅ Single-server deployments
- ✅ Learning MongoDB features
- ✅ Budget constraints (4 CPU machines work!)
- ✅ Quick iterations and debugging

### **Pros of Docker Compose**

| Aspect | Docker Compose |
|--------|----------------|
| **Setup Time** | 5-10 minutes |
| **Commands** | `docker compose up -d` (that's it!) |
| **Resource Requirements** | 4 CPUs, 8GB RAM, 20GB disk |
| **Learning Curve** | ⭐ Easy - just YAML |
| **Debugging** | ⭐⭐⭐ Very easy - `docker logs` |
| **Updates** | ⭐⭐⭐ Simple - edit YAML, restart |
| **Cost** | $ Cheap cloud VMs work fine |
| **Networking** | Simple - localhost everywhere |
| **State Management** | Docker volumes (simple) |

### **Cons of Docker Compose**

- ❌ No high availability (single server)
- ❌ No auto-failover
- ❌ Manual scaling required
- ❌ No native `$vectorSearch` (unless using hybrid)
- ❌ Not production-grade for critical apps

### **Example Docker Compose Workflow**

```bash
# Start everything
docker compose up -d

# Check logs
docker compose logs -f

# Update configuration
nano docker-compose.yml

# Restart
docker compose restart

# Stop
docker compose down

# Total complexity: LOW
```

---

## ☸️ **Kubernetes: Enterprise & Production**

### **When to Use Kubernetes**

- ✅ Production deployments
- ✅ High availability requirements
- ✅ Auto-scaling needs
- ✅ Multi-server deployments
- ✅ Enterprise compliance
- ✅ Complex microservices

### **Pros of Kubernetes**

| Aspect | Kubernetes |
|--------|------------|
| **High Availability** | ✅ 3+ node replica sets |
| **Auto-Failover** | ✅ Automatic pod rescheduling |
| **Scaling** | ✅ Horizontal pod autoscaling |
| **Monitoring** | ✅ Ops Manager included |
| **Enterprise Features** | ✅ All MongoDB Enterprise features |
| **Native Vector Search** | ✅ Dedicated mongot pods |
| **Production Ready** | ✅ Battle-tested at scale |

### **Cons of Kubernetes**

| Aspect | Challenge |
|--------|-----------|
| **Setup Time** | ⏱️ 30-60 minutes |
| **Commands** | 🤯 kubectl, helm, yaml manifests |
| **Resource Requirements** | 💰 10+ CPUs, 16GB+ RAM, 50GB disk |
| **Learning Curve** | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ Steep - pods, services, CRDs |
| **Debugging** | 🔍 Complex - multiple layers |
| **Updates** | 📦 Operator-managed, can be complex |
| **Cost** | $$$ Expensive infrastructure |
| **Networking** | 🌐 Complex - services, ingress, DNS |
| **State Management** | 💾 PVCs, StatefulSets, operators |

### **Example Kubernetes Workflow**

```bash
# Create cluster
./setup-kubernetes-cluster.sh

# Deploy operator
helm install mongodb-kubernetes mongodb/mongodb-kubernetes

# Create MongoDB resource
kubectl apply -f mongodb.yaml

# Check status
kubectl get pods -n mongodb
kubectl get mdb -n mongodb
kubectl logs deployment/mongodb-kubernetes-operator

# Debug issues
kubectl describe pod mongodb-0 -n mongodb
kubectl get events -n mongodb
kubectl logs -n mongodb mongodb-0 -c mongodb-enterprise-database

# Update configuration
kubectl edit mdb mdb-rs -n mongodb

# Total complexity: HIGH
```

---

## 🔄 **Hybrid: Best of Both Worlds**

### **The Hybrid Approach**

- **Docker Compose** (4 CPUs): MongoDB, Backend, Frontend, Ollama
- **Kubernetes** (2-3 CPUs): Only mongot search pods

### **Why Hybrid is Great**

| Benefit | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Lower Resources** | 6-7 CPUs instead of 10+ |
| **Easier Debugging** | App in Docker (simple), search in K8s |
| **Native Vector Search** | Get `$vectorSearch` without full K8s |
| **Cost Effective** | Cheaper than full K8s |
| **Good Balance** | Production features, dev simplicity |

### **Hybrid Deployment**

```bash
# 1. Start Docker Compose (app)
docker compose up -d

# 2. Deploy search to Kubernetes
export SEARCH_SYNC_PASSWORD="password123"
./archive/scripts/deploy-search-only.sh  # Note: This script is archived but available for hybrid deployments

# 3. Connect them
cat > docker-compose.override.yml << EOF
services:
  mongodb:
    environment:
      MONGOT_HOST: "LOADBALANCER_IP:27027"
EOF

docker compose restart mongodb

# Done! Native vector search with Docker simplicity
```

---

## 📊 **Feature Comparison**

| Feature | Docker Compose | Hybrid | Full Kubernetes |
|---------|----------------|--------|-----------------|
| **Setup Complexity** | ⭐ Easy | ⭐⭐ Medium | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ Hard |
| **Resource Needs** | 4 CPU, 8GB | 6-7 CPU, 10GB | 10+ CPU, 16GB+ |
| **High Availability** | ❌ No | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **Native $vectorSearch** | ❌ No | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes |
| **Auto-Failover** | ❌ No | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **Ops Manager** | ❌ No | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **Debugging Ease** | ⭐⭐⭐ | ⭐⭐ | ⭐ |
| **Update Speed** | ⭐⭐⭐ | ⭐⭐ | ⭐ |
| **Cost** | $ | $$ | $$$ |
| **Production Ready** | ⚠️ Dev only | ⚠️ Small prod | ✅ Enterprise |

---

## 💡 **Why Docker is Easier Than Kubernetes**

### **1. Simplicity**

**Docker Compose:**
```yaml
services:
  mongodb:
    image: mongodb/mongodb-enterprise-server:8.2.1
    ports:
      - "27017:27017"
```

**Kubernetes:**
```yaml
apiVersion: mongodb.com/v1
kind: MongoDB
metadata:
  name: mdb-rs
spec:
  members: 3
  version: 8.2.1-ent
  type: ReplicaSet
  credentials: om-credentials
  opsManager:
    configMapRef:
      name: om-project
  # ... 50 more lines ...
```

### **2. Debugging**

**Docker Compose:**
```bash
docker compose logs mongodb
# Done! See the logs.
```

**Kubernetes:**
```bash
kubectl logs deployment/mongodb-kubernetes-operator -n mongodb
kubectl logs mdb-rs-0 -n mongodb -c mongodb-enterprise-database
kubectl logs mdb-rs-0 -n mongodb -c mongodb-agent
kubectl describe pod mdb-rs-0 -n mongodb
kubectl get events -n mongodb
# Which one has the error? 🤔
```

### **3. Networking**

**Docker Compose:**
- Everything connects via `service-name:port`
- `mongodb:27017` - that's it!

**Kubernetes:**
- Services, ClusterIP, LoadBalancer, NodePort
- DNS: `mdb-rs-svc.mongodb.svc.cluster.local:27017`
- External access needs ingress or port-forward
- Network policies, CNI plugins...

### **4. State Management**

**Docker Compose:**
```yaml
volumes:
  mongodb_data:
```

**Kubernetes:**
```yaml
# PersistentVolumeClaim
# StorageClass
# Dynamic provisioning
# StatefulSet volumeClaimTemplates
# Storage drivers
# ... many concepts ...
```

### **5. Updates**

**Docker Compose:**
```bash
# Edit docker-compose.yml
nano docker-compose.yml

# Restart
docker compose restart
```

**Kubernetes:**
```bash
# Update through operator
kubectl edit mdb mdb-rs -n mongodb

# Wait for operator to reconcile
kubectl get mdb -w

# Check if it worked
kubectl describe mdb mdb-rs

# Roll back if needed
kubectl rollout undo statefulset/mdb-rs
```

---

## 🎯 **Recommendations by Use Case**

### **Development / Learning**
→ **Docker Compose**
- Fastest setup
- Easy to experiment
- Simple debugging

### **Demo / POC**
→ **Docker Compose** or **Hybrid**
- Docker Compose for simple demos
- Hybrid if you need to show vector search

### **Small Production (< 1000 users)**
→ **Hybrid**
- Get production features
- Lower cost than full K8s
- Easier to manage

### **Enterprise Production**
→ **Full Kubernetes**
- High availability required
- Auto-failover needed
- Budget for infrastructure

### **Budget Constrained**
→ **Docker Compose**
- Runs on cheap $20/month VMs
- 4 CPU machines work fine

---

## 📖 **Getting Started**

### **Quick Start with Docker Compose**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/darmad78/RAGOnPremMongoDB.git
cd RAGOnPremMongoDB
docker compose up -d
# Visit http://localhost:5173
```

### **Quick Start with Hybrid**
```bash
# 1. Docker app
docker compose up -d

# 2. K8s search
export SEARCH_SYNC_PASSWORD="password123"
./deploy-search-only.sh

# 3. Connect
# Follow instructions from deploy-search-only.sh
```

### **Quick Start with Kubernetes**
```bash
./setup-kubernetes-cluster.sh
./deploy.sh
```

---

## ❓ **FAQ**

**Q: Can I start with Docker and migrate to Kubernetes later?**
A: Yes! Use `mongodump` to backup, deploy K8s, then `mongorestore`.

**Q: Why can't Docker Compose do high availability?**
A: Docker Compose runs on a single host. If that host dies, everything stops.

**Q: Is hybrid deployment production-ready?**
A: For small-medium workloads, yes. For mission-critical with 24/7 uptime needs, use full Kubernetes.

**Q: How much does each option cost per month?**
A: 
- Docker Compose: $20-50 (single VM)
- Hybrid: $50-100 (VM + small K8s)
- Full Kubernetes: $200-500+ (managed K8s cluster)

**Q: Which gives me native $vectorSearch?**
A: Hybrid and Full Kubernetes. Docker Compose uses Python fallback (which still works well!).

---

## 🎓 **Learning Path**

1. **Start**: Docker Compose (1 hour to learn)
2. **Add**: Hybrid deployment (understand K8s basics)
3. **Advance**: Full Kubernetes (weeks to master)

Don't jump straight to Kubernetes unless you need it!

---

**Questions?** Check the main [README.md](./README.md) for detailed guides!
